<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2021 Free Software Foundation Europe <https://fsfe.org>

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-3.0-DE
-->

# Ada & Zangemann - A fairy tale about software, skateboards and raspberry ice cream

[![REUSE status](https://api.reuse.software/badge/git.fsfe.org/fsfe/ada-zangemann)](https://api.reuse.software/info/git.fsfe.org/fsfe/ada-zangemann)

This are the sources for the illustrated children's book "Ada &
Zangemann - A fairy tale about software, skateboards and raspberry ice
cream".

The book tells the story of the famous inventor Zangemann and the girl
Ada, a curious tinkerer. Ada begins to experiment with hardware and
software, and in the process realises how crucial it is for her and
others to control technology. Here the short summary:

> The famous inventor Zangemann lives in a huge villa high above the
> city. Adults and children alike love his inventions and are desperate
> to have them. But then something happens: when Zangemann once again
> wants to take a close-up look at his inventions during a walk through
> the city and, with a loud thud, a child riding a skateboard hits him
> in the shin! Enraged, the inventor makes a momentous decision... The
> clever girl Ada sees through it all. Together with her friends, she
> forges a plan.

This book by Matthias Kirschner (author) and Sandra Brandstätter
(illustrator) is licensed under the Creative Commons CC-BY-SA a free
cultural license.

You can share, copy, and redistribute the material in any medium or
format. You can adapt, remix, transform, and build upon the material for
any purpose, even commercially. You must give appropriate credit,
provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made. You
may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the
licensor endorses you or your use. If you remix, transform, or build
upon the material, you must distribute your contributions under the same
license as the original. (This is a human-readable summary of - and not
a substitute for - the [legal code of CC-BY-SA 3.0
DE](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/de/legalcode) or
[CC-BY-SA
4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/en/legalcode).

Furthermore for remix versions (derivative works), the licensor asks you
not to make any modifications of the author's personal acknowledgements
and the author's and illustrator's short biographies; or else rather
completely remove those parts from your remix version.

Publication under this free cultural license was possible due to the
great support by dpunkt.verlag GmbH / O'Reilly for the German book and
No Starch Press for the English book. Unfortunately Creative Commons
licenses are still rare exceptions for commercial published books, and
often considered revolutionary and risky by publishers.

**A big thank you to dpunkt.verlag and No Starch Press for understanding
the values of software freedom, taking the time to discuss and
understand the advantages of free cultural licenses, and the great
support to publish this book under conditions that respect the FSFE's
values.**

# Translations

The FSFE would like to as many people as possible to learn about the
book and being able to read it in their mother tongue. Therefore the
FSFE is currently looking for a suitable publisher for an English
edition and in the next step figure out the best process for other
translations.

# Get your printed copy

The printed version as well as ebooks of the book are currently
available:

* In English by No Starch Press. You can order the hardcover [directly
  from No Starch Press](https://nostarch.com/ada-zangemann), get 25% off
  with the coupon code "Hacking4Freedom", receive the DRM free ebook
  now, and get the book sent from the US now. If you live outside the US
  there are other options: you should be able to pre-order the book from
  local book stores worldwide, so the book does not have to be shipped
  from the US. Those book stores should then be able to ship the book
  from ~August 2023 onwards.

* In German by dpunkt.verlag GmbH under the O'Reilly imprint. You can
  order it at any book store, or with this affiliate link [directly from
  Dpunkt.verlag for which the FSFE will receive 12% of the
  list price](https://oreilly.de/produkt/ada-und-zangemann/?ref=10022).

Thanks to a generous donation we also translated the book into
Ukrainian, printed 2750 non-profit copies ourselves, and distributed
those to organisations working with refugee children from Ukraine. After
a follow-up donation we translated it into Arabic, printed 7000
non-profit copies, and again distributed them to organisations working
with Arabic speaking children in Europe. 

# Profits of sales

Matthias Kirschner wrote the text on a voluntary basis for the FSFE. All
author revenues of book and ebook sales go directly to the non-profit
Free Software Foundation Europe. The FSFE paid the illustrator Sandra
Brandstätter and the children's book editor Wiebke Helmchen for their
work. Linuxhotel GmbH made the project possible by already agreeing at
the beginning of the writing process, to buy 1000 copies once the book
was finished.

# Free as in freedom not price

Free Software is about the freedoms you receive with the software, not
about the price. Likewise publishing a book under a free culture license
does not mean you have the right to get a gratis copy of the book or
ebook. It means you get the rights described above, which enable society
to benefit further from it, as all culture should.

We encourage you to support authors, publishers, and others involved in
the creation of culture under free licenses -- **including financially
supporting them through purchases or
[donations](https://fsfe.org/donate)**. Society should support those who
respect others freedom.
